Add documentation for how codegen works in the sdk (#23742)
project-chip/connectedhomeip: docs/code_generation.md

# Code generation

## Code generation inputs (`*.zap` files)

Matter code relies on code generation for cluster-specific data types and
callbacks. Generally this is split into:

-   Data serialization for structures/lists/commands. This applies to both
    client-side and server-side structures and objects

> -   Callback setup using the ember framework. This generally applies to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Callback setup using the Ember-based framework. This generally applies to
```

    to be done when a specific command is sent/attribute is read and what memory
    should be allocated for storing cluster attributes

Code generation depends on the clusters that are needed by an application. Every
application can have a different cluster and endpoint configuration. The
selection of the supported clusters and attributes (since attributes are
optional, not all attributes of a cluster need to be supported and RAM allocated
for them) is generally stored in `*.zap` files.

The selection of enabled clusters and files is done using
[ZAP](https://github.com/project-chip/zap). You can download a recent release of
zap from its [releases page](https://github.com/project-chip/zap/releases). It
is recommended to download a release that is in sync with the currently in use
version by the SDK (see `integrations/docker/images/chip-build/Dockerfile` and
check the `ZAP_VERSION` setting).

Beyond basic zap file selection, there are also `.json` zap settings that define
additional cluster info: source XML files, sdk-access methods and data types.
There are only 2 currently in use such files:

-   `src/app/zap-templates/zcl/zcl.json` is the **default** one

> -   `src/app/zap-templates/zcl/zcl-with-test-extensions.json` is in use for
>     `all-clusters-app` to show how a cluster extension is configured and has
>     minimal diffs from `zcl.json` (but it is different)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   `src/app/zap-templates/zcl/zcl-with-test-extensions.json` is used by
    `all-clusters-app` to show how a cluster extension may be configured with
    minimal changes from `zcl.json` (but it is different)
```

### Installing zap and environment variables

Matter scripts may need to invoke `zap-cli` (for code generation) or `zap` (to

> start the UI tool). For this, it needs to know where to find the commands. In

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
start the UI tool). For this, scripts need to know where to find the commands. In
```

> order, the scripts will check for the following environment variables:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the following order, scripts must process these environment variables:
```

### Using a UI to edit `.zap` files

Generally you need to invoke zap with appropriate zcl and generate arguments.
Most of code generation is app specific, so you generally want something of the
form
`--gen src/app/zap-templates/app-templates.json --zcl $ZCL_JSON_FILE $ZAP_FILE_TO_EDIT`

Since this is tedious to type, the SDK provides a
`scripts/tools/zap/run_zaptool.sh` script to automate this:

```bash
# Ensure zap is in $PATH or set $ZAP_INSTALL_PATH or $ZAP_DEVELOPMENT_PATH
./scripts/tools/zap/run_zaptool.sh examples/lighting-app/lighting-common/lighting-app.zap
```

### Human-readable code generation inputs (`*.matter`)

`.zap` files are large json files that are generally not human readable. As a
result, the Matter SDK also keeps an equivalent `*.matter` file along side
`.zap` files that contain the same data as `.zap` files, targeted specifically
for matter:

-   They are designed to be human readable, looking like a IDL (think protobuf
    or android `aidl`, thrift idl etc.)

-   We strive to make them contain only Matter-specific data (`.zap` files
    contain
-   more generic data and is designed to be ZigBee backwards compatible)

> Currently `.matter` file are generated from `.zap` files during the application

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently `.matter` files are generated from `.zap` files during the application
```

specific codegen.

### `*.matter` parsing and codegen

`*.matter` files are both human and machine readable. Code that can process
these files is available at `scripts/idl` and `scripts/codegen.py`. You can read

> the [Readme.md](../scripts/idl/README.md) for details of how things work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the file [scripts/idl/README.md](../scripts/idl/README.md) for details of how things work.
```

`scripts/codegen.py` can generate various outputs based on an input `*.matter`
file.

The split between `.zap` and `.matter` currently exists as an experiment of code

> generation technologies. Currently python codegen:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
generation technologies. Currently `.matter`-based Python code generation:
```

> generation technologies. Currently python codegen:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
generation technologies. The motivation for python code generation based on `.matter` files include:
```

Reviewer 2: If you take this change, some rephrasing of bullets below may be required.

Author: I would prefer to keep old phrasing so that it shows current state rather than what we started with. When we started I think zap had more problems (e.g. it could not be properly installed as stand-alone and that was more problematic to run at compile time.

> -   has less dependencies than the `nodejs` dependencies of `zap`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- lower complexity
- easier maintenance
- fewer third party dependencies than `zap` (which installs a significant number of `npm` packages)
```

-   runs significantly faster than zap

> -   more flexible codegen (can generate multiple files per cluster for example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   offers more flexible code generation (can generate multiple files per cluster for example,
```

> -   without which some compiles would run out of RAM on large compilations)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    without which some compiles would run out of RAM on large compilations)
```

-   has a more flexible templating language
-   has human readable (and potentially editable) input
-   is more easily provable deterministic (`zap` uses an underlying sqlite
    database and some legacy assumptions from zigbee have historically caused
    non-determinism)

> -   synchronous processing of data is potentially easier to develop for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   uses a synchronous processing model which is potentially easier to develop for
```

> Ideal long term goal for the project would be to have a single code generation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ideally, the project would be to have a single code generation method in the long term
```

> logic that has all the benefits and none of the drawbacks. We are not there yet,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that has all the benefits and none of the drawbacks. We are not there yet,
```

however we likely want:

-   flexible codegen (we will need to split output by clusters or other rules)

> -   Human readable inputs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Human-readable inputs that enable code reviews and audits
```

> -   Rules that a script can validate based on CSA settings (ensure mandatory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Rules that a script can validate based on CSA data model (ensure mandatory
```

    attribute settings are followed, ensure proer device type adherence, ensure
    correct cluster and data type definitions)
-   Easy to maintain and develop for chosen languages/templates/codegen in
    general

## Code generation outputs and templates

Code that is generated:

-   **Application-specific**:

    -   ZAP generation is based on `.zap` files in `examples/` and generates
        server-side processing data: what cluster callbacks to set up, what RAM
        to reserve for attribute storage etc.

    -   `Codegen.py` will also generate a subset of application-specific files

-   **Automated tests**: embedded client-side tools (`chip-tool` and
    `darwin-framework-tool`) generate test-definition data. Each use their own
    `examples/${TOOL}/templates/tests/templates.json` to drive what gets

>     generated. Further more, test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    generated.
```
